# Maven Key Concepts

- _Apache Maven_ is a project management tool based on the Project Object Model (POM), which uses a standardized directory structure to manage builds, dependencies, and documentation.

- Key concepts include:
  - **pom.xml** configuration
  - **Dependency management**
    - Libraries or plugins required by the project that Maven automatically downloads and manages.

  - **Structured build lifecycles phases**
    - compile, test, package, verify, install, deploy
    - A sequence of defined phases that automate the build process
  - **Repositories**
    - **Local**: A directory on your machine caching downloaded dependencies.
    - **Central**: The default remote repository provided by the Maven community.
  - **Plugins**
    - Tools used by Maven to perform specific tasks, such as compilation, testing, or creating JAR files.

## What is the POM (Project Object Model)?

- It is an XML representation of a Maven project saved in a file named **pom.xml**.
- pom.xml file is a configuration file used by Apache Maven to build, manage, and describe Java projects.
- pom.xml file located in the root directory of a Maven project.
- pom.xml file defines project metadata, dependencies, plugins, and build lifecycle details.

Reference: https://maven.apache.org/pom.html#what-is-the-pom

## What is Maven Lifecycle?

- Maven has three built-in build lifecycles:
  1. default
  2. clean
  3. site

- Each lifecycle is composed of a sequence of phases, and executing a specific phase from the command line will run all phases preceding it in that lifecycle.

### `Default` Lifecycle

- The default lifecycle has over 20 phases.

- The most commonly used lifecycle, the `default lifecycle` handles project building and deployment.
- Its key phases include:
  - **validate**
    - Validates the project structure and pom.xml to ensure all necessary information and dependencies are correct and available.
  - **compile**
    - Compiles the project's source code (e.g., .java files into .class files).
  - **test**
    - Runs the unit tests for the compiled source code using a suitable testing framework like _JUnit_ or _TestNG_.
  - **package**
    - Takes the compiled code and packages it in its distributable format, such as a JAR, WAR, or EAR file, and places it in the target directory.

  - **verify**
    - Runs any checks on the packaged artifact (e.g., integration tests or quality checks) to ensure it is valid and meets quality criteria.

  - **install**
    - Installs the packaged artifact into the local Maven repository, making it available for other projects on the same machine to use as a dependency.

  - **deploy**
    - Copies the final package to the remote repository for sharing with other developers and projects, typically in a release environment.

### `Clean` Lifecycle

- The clean lifecycle manages the process of cleaning the project directory to ensure a fresh build environment.
- Its key phases include:
  - **pre-clean**
    - Executes processes required before the actual project cleaning.
  - **clean**
    - Removes all files generated by the previous build, typically deleting the target directory.
  - **post-clean**
    - Executes processes needed after the project cleaning is complete.

### `Site` Lifecycle

- The site lifecycle is responsible for generating and deploying project documentation and reports.
- Its key phases include:
  - pre-site: Executes processes needed before the site documentation is generated.
  - site: Generates the project's site documentation (e.g., Javadoc, test reports).
- post-site: Executes processes needed to finalize the site generation and prepare for deployment.
- site-deploy: Deploys the generated site documentation to a specified web server or remote repository.

## Maven `goals` vs `plugins` vs `phases`

### What are `Maven goals`?

- A _Maven goal_ is just a Java method which performs a specific task within your build.

- Maven by default bundles many of these goal methods for you to use in your build:
  - compile
  - test
  - jar
  - install
  - deploy

### What are `Maven plugins`?

- A plugin is a jar file packaged up in a way that makes the goals contained inside available to Maven builds.
- A plugin can contain one or more goals.

- For any Maven plugin, you can query its goals on the command line by running following command:

```
# Syntax
mvn <plugin-name>:help

# Example
mvn jar: help
```

- **Executing a plugin's goal**

```
# To execute a maven goal
mvn <plugin name>:<goal name>

# Example
mvn jar:jar
```

### Maven phases

- Maven phase is a group of goals.

- Maven offers a nice way to group multiple goals belonging to different plugins.

- A phase can contain a single goal, multiple goals, or no goals.

## Commonly used `Maven Plugins and Goals`

- _maven-clean-plugin (clean)_
  - Removes the target directory, cleaning up previous build artifacts.

- _maven-compiler-plugin_
  - compile: Compiles source code (files)
  - testCompile: Compiles test source code
- _maven-surefire-plugin (test)_
  - Runs unit tests using frameworks like JUnit.
- _maven-resources-plugin (resources)_
  - Copies project resources to the output directory.
- _maven-jar-plugin (jar)_
  - Packages the compiled code into a JAR file.
- _maven-install-plugin (install)_
  - Installs the packaged artifact (JAR/WAR) into the local repository.
- _maven-deploy-plugin (deploy)_
  - Copies the final package to a remote repository.
- _maven-failsafe-plugin (integration-test/verify)_
  - Runs integration tests.
- _maven-help-plugin_
  - Provides documentation and information about the project or plugin goals, such as help:describe.
