# Creating a Jenkins Job

## Prerequisites

- A Jenkins server with access over SSH and 8080

## Lab-01: Create a simple Jenkins Job (freestyle)

### Create a Freestyle Jenkins Job

- Jenkins Dashboard >> **New Item**
  - Name: my-first-jenkins-job
  - Type: Freestyle
  - Description: This is my first jenkins job
  - SCM: <leave_to_defaults>
  - Build Triggers: <leave_to_defaults>
  - Build Environment: <leave_to_defaults>
  - Build: Execute Shell
    ```
    echo 'Jenkins is awesome..'
    ```
  - Post-build Actions: <leave_to_defaults>
  - Click **Apply** & **Save**

## Lab-02: Create a Jenkins Job with `Parameters`

- To define **parameters** for your job, select the This _project is parameterized_ check box while creating a freestyle jenkins job.

- Jenkin Dashboard >> **New Item**
  - **Name**
  - **Type**: Freestyle
  - **General**
    - Check **This project is parameterized** checkbox
    - Select the type of parameter (boolean, string, choice, credential etc)
    - Enter **Parameter Name**, **Default value** and **Description**

- The above parameters will be parsed dynamically at the run time. The field values should be entered in the following syntax:

```
# Syntax
${ParameterName}

# Examples - To invoke above created parameter values
${DB_URL}

${DB_USERNAME}

${API}
```

- The values can also be changed before triggering the Jenkins build.

- Now, select the created Jenkins job and you will see all the param input fields where in you can enter values.

## Lab-03: Demonstrate how to use Jenkins `Plugins` and `Credentials`

### Jenkins Plugins

### Jenkins Credentials

## Lab-04: Integrate Jenkins with GitHub using HTTPS based authentication (PAT)

- Jenkins has a number of plugins for integrating into GitHub.
- The primary reason for integrating Jenkins deployment with GitHub is build integration.

- **Git plugin**
  - With the help of Git plugin, Jenkins can easily pull source code from any Git repository that the Jenkins build node can access.

- **GitHub plugin**
  - _GitHub plugin_ extends upon that integration further by providing improved bi-directional integration with GitHub.
  - It also allows you to set up a _Service Hook_ which will hit your Jenkins controller every time a change is pushed to GitHub.

### Prerequisites

- GitHub Account
- Jenkins server

### Step-4.1: Create a new GitHub repository (private)

- Navigate to https://gitHub.com/ >> Sign-in
- Select **Repositories** tab >> click **New** button
  - **Repository Name**: sample-app
  - **Description**
  - **Scope**: Private

- Click **Create repository** button

### Step-4.2: Generate a GitHub token (PAT)

- Navigate to your GitHub account settings >> **Developer settings** >> **Personal access tokens** >> **Tokens (classic)**
- Click on **Generate new token**
  - **Note**: Access for private repositories
  - **Select scopes**: Check all the checkboxes
  - Click on **Generate token**.
    - A token will be generated; copy the generated token as we'll need it in the next step.

### Step-4.3: Add GitHub credential (PAT) on Jenkins

- Jenkins dashboard >> **Manage Jenkins** >> **Credentials** >> **System** >> **Global credentials** >> Click on Add Credentials button.
  - **Kind**: Secret text
  - **Secret**: <paste_the_GitHub_token_you_generated_earlier>
  - **ID**: github-creds
- Click **OK** to save the credentials.

### Step-4.4: Install required `Jenkins Plugins` (if not already installed)

- Jenkins Dashboard >> Manage Jenkins >> Plugins
- To check if the **GitHub** plugin & **GitHub Branch Source** plugins are already installed, select _Installed plugins_ section and search for GitHub. If not already installed, continue else skip this step.

- Switch to **Available plugins** >> search for **GitHub**, select and install.

### Step-4.5: Create a Jenkins Job to read the GitHub source code

- Jenkins Dashboard >> New Item
  - Job Name: gh-integration-with-jenkins
  - Description
  - Source Code Management:
    - select Git >> provide your github repo url and brach specs
    - Click on **Add** button next to _Credentials_ and select the credential we created in the previous step.
- Click **Save** & **Apply**

### Step-4.6: Test the Integration | Verify the cloned source code on Jenkins server

- Manually trigger a build from the Jenkins dashboard.

- Check the build status and logs in Jenkins to ensure everything is working as expected.

```
# To verify the cloned source code, list all the files from Jenkins workspace directory
ls -l /var/lib/jenkins/workspace/<your_jenkins_job_name>

[The preceding command should list all the files cloned from your github repo]
```

## 05. Jenkins `Job Chaining`

### Overview

- Jenkins job chaining, aka build pipelines, is the process of linking jenkins jobs together so that one job triggers another upon completion.
- This allows for the automation of multi-step workflows and CD pipelines.
- A downstream job is automatically executed after an upstream job finishes, creating a sequence of automated tasks.

### Why use Jenkins Job Chaining?

- Automated workflow
- Continuous Delivery
- Reduced Errors
- Dependency Management

### Lab: Create a simple Jenkins Pipeline to demonstrate `Job Chaining` and `Jenkins Continuous Delivery build pipelines`

## 06. Jenkins Job `Post-build Actions`

- Jenkins post-build actions are tasks that are executed after a build is completed, regardless of whether the build was successful or not.
- These actions are defined in the _post-build actions_ configuration of a freestyle job or _post_ section of a pipeline.
