# Lab: Configure Jenkins job with GitHub Webhook Trigger (automatic)

In this article, we will setup the GitHub + Jenkins for triggering job using GitHub webhook events. Involves following topics:

1. Install and configure the GitHub plugin in Jenkins

2. Create a GitHub repository and Push the App code to it

3. Create and Configure GitHub Webhook for Jenkins

4. Create a Jenkins job and configure it for receiving GitHub events

5. Testing the Webhook trigger

## Prerequisites

- [Jenkins server](https://github.com/kbindesh/jenkins-masterclass/blob/main/Module-14_Labs/02-setup-jenkins-server-linux.md)

## Step-01: Install GitHub Plugin on Jenkins server

- Before you go ahead and install _GitHub_ plugin, kindly check if it is already installed.
  - Jenkins Dashboard >> **Manage Jenkins** >> **Plugins**
  - **Installed Plugins** >> Search **GitHub**
  - If it is already installed, you can skip this step and move to next step.
- If not already installed, navigate to **Available plugins** section >> Search **GitHub** plugin, select it and install it.

## Step-02: Create a new Github Repo and Push sample app code

### Step-2.1: Create a GitHub repo

- Sign-in to your GitHub account >> **Repositories** tab >> **New** button
  - **Repository Name**: gh-webhook-lab-repo
  - **Description**: This repository demonstrate the use of GitHub webhooks to automatically trigger jenkins job
  - **Scope**: Public

### Step-2.2: Push the sample app code to the above created GitHub repo

- Clone the above created GitHub repo and open the directory in VS Code

```
git clone <YOUR_GITHUB_REPO_URL>

# Example
git clone https://github.com/kbindesh/gh-webhook-lab-repo.git
```

- Generate a sample Maven App

- Push the App code to GitHub:

```
# Stage the changes
git add .

# Commit the changes
git commit -m "Initial Commit"

# Add remote origin
git remote add origin <YOUR_GITHUB_REPO_URL>

# Push the App code
git push -u origin master
[Replace the above branch name (here, master) as per your setup]
```

## Step-03: Create and Configure `GitHub Webhook` for Jenkins

- Navigate to your GitHub Account >> Select your repository which has the application source code >> Select **Setting** tab
- Select **Webhooks** >> **Add Webhook**
  - **Payload URL**
    - http://<YOUR_JENKINS_SERVER_PUBLIC_IP_OR_DNS>:8080/github-webhook/
    - Example: http://xx.xx.xx.xx:8080/github-webhook/
  - **Content Type**: application/json
  - **SSL Verification**: Enable SSL Verification
  - **Which events would you like to trigger this webhook?**: Just the push event
  - **Active**: Enable
- Click **Add Webhook** button

## Step-04: Create a Jenkins job with Webhook Trigger

- Jenkins Dashboard >> **New Item**
  - _Name_: gh-webhook-demo
  - _Type_: Freestyle
  - _Description_: Jenkins job for demontrating gh webhook
  - _Source Code Management_
    - Git
      - Repository URL: <github_repo_url>
      - Branch to build: <github_branch_name>
  - _Build Triggers_: Poll SCM (GitHub Webhook)
  - _Build Environment_: <leave_to_defaults>
  - _Build_: Execute Shell
    ```
    echo 'Jenkins is awesome..'
    ```
  - **Post-build Actions**: <leave_to_defaults>
  - Click **Apply** & **Save**

## Step-05: Testing time

- To test the webhook tigger, make changes to the app code on your local system and push them to GitHub repository.
- This will activate the webhook, and Jenkins should automatically trigger the job.

## Conclusion

- Congratulations! You just have created a fully functional Jenkins GitHub integration.
- When you publish changes to GitHub, GitHub triggered your Jenkins job.
- It is a small yet a critical step towards creating a full fledged CI pipeline.
