# Connecting to GitHub with SSH

- In this section, you will learn how to connect to GitHub with SSH on Windows.
- It involves:
  1. Generating an SSH key pair
  2. Adding the public key to your GitHub account
  3. Configuring your local environment to use it
- This process eliminates the need to enter your username and password or a personal access token for every interaction

## 01. Lab: Configure SSH Key pair based authentication for GitHub

### 1.1 Prerequisites

1. Git for Windows (https://git-scm.com/install/windows)

2. OpenSSH Client (Windows 10/11 | by default installed)

### 1.2 Check for existing SSH Key pairs

- Navigate to your Home folder (C:\Users\$Username) >> **.ssh** folder
  - You may find some existing ssh keys pairs listed.
- Generate a new keypair or use the existing one.
- In this lab, I'm going to generate a new SSH keypair.

### 1.3 Generate a new SSH key pair

- Open **Git Bash** or **PowerShell** (as an Administrator) >> Run the following command, replacing "your_email@example.com" with your GitHub email address:

```
ssh-keygen -t ed25519 -C "your_email@example.com"

[Press "Enter" to accept the default file location]
[Enter a secure passphrase or press Enter to leave it empty]
```

- Confirm the created SSH key pair by checking your $HOME\.ssh folder

### 1.4 Add your SSH key pair to the ssh-agent

- Ensure the SSH agent is running

```
# For Powershell (run as administrator), check the status of ssh-agent service
Get-service -Name ssh-agent

[If the preceding command says 'ssh-agent' is in 'Stopped' state, you need to start manually]

Get-Service -Name ssh-agent | Set-Service -StartupType Automatic

# Start the ssh-agent service
Start-Service ssh-agent

# Verify the ssh-agent service status
Get-service -Name ssh-agent
```

- Add your private key to the agent

```
ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_ed25519

[If you set a passphrase, you will be prompted to enter it now]
```

### 1.5 Add the Public Key to Your GitHub Account

- You need to provide GitHub with your public key so it can verify your identity.

- Manually open the id_ed25519.pub file located in C:\Users\YOUR_USERNAME\.ssh\ with a text editor and copy the entire content.

- Now, Go to GitHub Account >> Sign in >> GitHub account settings
  - In the left sidebar, click **SSH and GPG keys**
  - Click **New SSH key**
  - In the **Title** field, add a descriptive label (e.g., "Bindesh Lab PC")
  - In the **Key** field, paste the public key that you copied.
  - Click **Add SSH key**

### 1.6 Test your SSH Connection

- Now, it's time to verify that the connection is working by opening Git Bash or PowerShell and running:

```
ssh -T git@github.com

[When you see a prompt asking about the host's authenticity, type "yes" and press Enter, like below]

> The authenticity of host 'github.com (IP ADDRESS)' can't be established.
> ED25519 key fingerprint is SHA256:+DiY3wvvV6TuJJhbpZisF/zLDA0zPMSvHdkr4UvCOqU.
> Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)?
```

- A successful connection will display a message like: Hi USERNAME! You've successfully authenticated, but GitHub does not provide shell access.

### 1.7 Use SSH connection for your existing GitHub repositories

- Once you're connected to your GitHub account, you can now clone repositories using the SSH URL or update existing ones:

```
git clone git@github.com:USERNAME/REPOSITORY-NAME.git
```
