# Elastic Block Store (EBS)

## 01. EBS Overview

- Amazon Elastic Block Store (EBS) provides persistent, high-performance, **block-level storage volumes** for use with Amazon EC2 instances.

- EBS Volumes are AZ scoped

- EBS volumes have following features:
  - Highly available
  - Securely encrypted
  - Easily scalable with snapshot-based backup capabilities

- EBS volumes persist independently of the life of an instance.

- EBS is primarily designed for high-performance needs, such as running relational databases (e.g., Oracle) or as root volumes for operating systems.

## 02. EBS Volume Types

- **SSD** (gp2, gp3, io1, io1)
  - Best for transactional workloads, databases, and boot volumes.

- **HDD** (st1, sc1)
  - Ideal for throughput-intensive, large-data workloads, or low-cost storage.

## 03. Lab: Extend an EC2 Instance storage by creating & mounting a new EBS Volume on it

### 3.1 Create an EC2 Instance (Linux) with just a root volume

- AMI: Amazon Linux 2023 (or any other linux distro)
- InstanceType: t2.micro
- Security Group
  - Inbound: Allow SSH(22)
  - Outbound: Allow all (default)
- Storage
  - Root Volume: 10GB

Connect to your EC2 instance once created and verify the default list of block devices attached to the EC2 instance:

```
$ sudo lsblk
```

### 3.2 Create a new EBS Volume and attach it to your EC2 Instance

- AWS Management Console >> EC2 >> Elastic Block Store >> Volumes >> Click on **Create Volume** button
  - Volume Type: gp2
  - Size: 5GiB
  - IOPS and Throughput: [leave-to-defaults]
  - Availability Zone: [select-the-same-zone-as-your-ec2-instance] e.g us-east-1b

- Switch back to EBS list >> Select the volume that you just created >> Actions >> Attach volume
  - Instance: Select your EC2 Instance from the list
  - Device name: /dev/sdb
  - Click on **Attach** button

### 3.3 Connect to your EC2 Instance and Verify the EBS Volume attachment

```
sudo lsblk

[The output should show newly attached EBS volume as a new Disk e.g xvdb of 5GiB]
```

### 3.4 Create a Filesystem on newly attached volume

```
# Replace /dev/xvdb with your device name
sudo mkfs -t xfs /dev/xvdb
```

### 3.5 Create a Mountpoint and mount the EBS Volume on an EC2 instance

```
# Create a new directory for volume to be mounted
sudo mkdir /data

[You can use any directory name, e.g., /mnt/mydata]


# Mount the volume to the new directory
sudo mount /dev/xvdb /data

# Verify the disk/volume mount
sudo df -h
```

- Now, your EC2 instance is all set to store data on **/data** directory which is a mountpoint for newly created EBS volume.

## 04. EBS Pricing

- https://aws.amazon.com/ebs/pricing/

## References

- https://docs.aws.amazon.com/ebs/latest/userguide/ebs-creating-volume.html
